Title: Impact of Energy Disaggregation on Consumer Behavior: Summary
Date: 2014-02-16 13:16
Author: nipunbatra
Category: Blog
Tags: energy, nilm, phd
Slug: impact-of-energy-disaggregation-on-consumer-behavior-summary

The benefits of NILM or energy disaggregation have been questioned a lot
recently. Many argue that though the field is academically attractive,
it poses little value. Almost every NILM paper cites a study which
discusses that providing detailed feedback to the consumers might cut
down electricity consumption by upto 15%. Some of these are discussed by
[Suman Giri][] in his following two posts about motivating NILM: [Post
1][] and [2][]. The concerns mentioned seem very valid.

Recently, there was an [interesting publication][] from [Bidgely][], the
energy disaggregation startup from CA. In this post, I summarize some of
the main findings.

The paper discusses two user studies. Firstly, to quantify the benefits
from energy disaggregation. Secondly, it discusses about user engagement
via energy disaggregation. For the first study, they recruited two kinds
of participants living in CA: those who were already exposed to Bidgely
(called Treatment group) and those who were not (called Control group).
 The recruitment and user study were carried on a rolling basis. For the
treatment group, their 3 months of energy data prior to enrolling was
taken as their control condition. The paper presents results when they
had roughly 160 users across both groups with a fairly even geographical
distribution of consumers.

On an average, the Treatment group was consuming about 14% less than the
control group. Also, the authors report that with a 95% confidence,
there is a saving between 3 and 24%.  The authors believe that the users
exposed to Bidgely had energy savings of 14% on average due to
behavioral changes, as opposed to insulation or appliance upgrades.

In the second case study, 150 users taking services from an
international market energy retailer were given an access to Bidgely's
energy management platform for five months. Consumers were provided the
following feedback on their consumption (varying across temporal
resolution):

1.  Real time energy information
2.  Periodic usage alerts
3.  Summary emails

The feedback provided historical comparison of electricity consumption
in raw and diasaggregated form, in addition to real time information. It
also hinted possible culprits when energy usage spiked up, apart from
other tips. The study measured user engagement via a 20 question survey
and Google Analytics. The study revealed that about 40% of the users
were able to discover and correct energy inefficiencies. The study also
highlighted that the consumers found the real time information,
dissaggregated information and historical comparison of energy
consumption most helpful. In contrast, the users took low liking to
energy saving tips and efficiency scores. About 90% of the consumers
reported that they would recommend such a service to others.

The authors conclude by summarizing the main finding- real time energy
information and energy itemization can influence behavior which can
drive energy (and cost) savings. The authors also make a case of
understanding energy disaggregation to be a mean rather than an end and
motivating the need of providing actionable insights to the consumers.

This paper was presented at the 2013 [Behavior, Energy and Climate
Change (BECC) Conference][]. Other interesting papers accepted at this
conference may be found at: <http://escholarship.org/uc/bie_becc_2013>

  [Suman Giri]: http://suman.inferlab.org/
  [Post 1]: http://suman.inferlab.org/building-up-the-motivation-for-non-intrusive-load-monitoring/
  [2]: http://suman.inferlab.org/building-up-the-motivation-ii/
  [interesting publication]: http://escholarship.org/uc/item/62d3456p
  [Bidgely]: http://www.bidgely.com/
  [Behavior, Energy and Climate Change (BECC) Conference]: http://beccconference.org/
